.TH gnushogi 6
.SH NAME
gnushogi \- GNU Shogi (Japanese Chess), version 1.3
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gnushogi
[
.B [[-]a] 
.B [-b bookfile] 
.B [-B binbookfile] 
.B [-C] 
.B [-h langfile] 
.B [-L langfile] 
.B [-r length]
.B [-R]
.B [-s pathname] [-l pathname] 
.B [-S binbooksize]
.B [-t] [-c size] 
.B [-T size]
.B [-v]
.B [-x]
.B [-X]
.B arg1 arg2
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Gnushogi
plays a game of japanese chess (shogi) against the user or it plays against
itself.
.PP
At startup 
.I Gnushogi
reads the
.I binbook
file if it is present. It then looks for a 
.I book
file. If it is present it adds its contents to the 
.I binbook
data. If the 
.I binbook
file is writable a new combined
.I binbook
file is written.

.PP
.I Gnushogi
is a modified version of the gnuchess program.  It has a simple
alphanumeric board display, or it can be compiled for use with the
.B xshogi 
program under X windows.  The program gets its opening moves from the file
.B gnushogi.bbk 
which is located in a directory specified in the Makefile.  To invoke the
program type:
.TP
.B gnushogi -C
- simple curses based version
.TP
.B gnushogi -X (or just gnushogi)
- xshogi compatible version
.TP
.B gnushogi -R
- raw test display version
.SH TIME CONTROLS
.PP
If one argument is given, it is the search time per move in 
[minutes:]seconds.
So 
.B gnushogi 30
will generate one move every 30 seconds, while
.B gnushogi 5:00
will generate one move every 5 minutes.

If two or more arguments are given, they will be used to set tournament
time controls with the first argument of each pair being the number of
moves and the second being the total clock time in minutes[:seconds].
Thus, entering
.B gnushogi 60 5
will set
the clocks for 5 minutes (300 seconds) for the first 60 moves,
and 
.B gnushogi 30 3:30
will allow 3 minutes and 30 seconds for 30 moves.

.B gnushogi 30 5 1 :30
will allow 5 minutes for the first 30 moves and 30 seconds for each move
after that.  Up to 4 pairs of controls may be specified.

If no argument is given the program will prompt the user for level of play.

For use with 
.B xshogi
see the documentation on that program.
.SH BOOK
.PP
The book
.I gnushogi.tbk
consists of a sequence of openings.  An opening begins with a line starting
with a
.B #
, the rest of the line is a comment.  Following this is a series of moves
in algebraic notation alternating black and white separated by white
space. A move may have a
.B ?
after it indicating this move should never be made in this position.
Moves are stored as position:move so transpositions between openings
can take place. 
.SH HASHFILE
.PP
The hashfile if created should be on the order of 4 megabytes or
.B gnushogi -c 22.
This file contains positions and moves learned from previous games.  If a
hashfile is used the computer makes use of the experience it gained in past
games. Tests run so far show that it plays no worse with the hashfile than
without, but it is not clear yet whether it provides a real advantage.
.SH LEGAL MOVES
.PP
.B Note:
Piece letters are determined by the language file.
What is specified here is the default (English).
.PP
Once
.I gnushogi
is invoked, the program will display the board and prompt the user
for a move. To enter a move, use the notation 
.B 7g7f
where the first letter-number pair indicates the origin square
and the second letter-number pair indicates the destination square.
An alternative is to use the notation 
.B P7f
where the first letter indicates the piece type (P,L,N,S,G,B,R,K).
To promote append a + the type of the new piece to the move, as in 
.B 2d2c+ 
or 
.B P2c+.
Note that you must use capital letters for the pieces by default.
.SH "COMMAND-LINE OPTIONS"
.TP
.B -a
Do not search on opponent's time.
.TP
.B a
Do search on opponent's time.
.TP
.B -b bookfile
Use bookfile for opening book.
.TP
.B -B binbookfile
Use binbookfile for binary opening book.
.TP
.B -c size
Create a new HASHFILE. File size is 2^size entries of approximately 65+? bytes.
.TP
.B -C
Use curses-based display mode.
.TP
.B -h 
Do not use hashfile.
.TP
.B h 
Do use hashfile.
.TP
.B -l pathname
Pathname of the loadfile use with
.BR get
or
.BR xget.
.TP
.B -L lang
Use language 
.I lang from the file 
.B gnushogi.lang.
If -L is not specified it uses the first language in the file.
.TP
.B -P plylevels
Number of plys to include in the binbookfile. For generating a binbookfile.
.TP
.B -r length
Rehash length times in searching  entries for position in transposition table.
.TP
.B -R
Use raw text display mode.  This can be used for dumb terminals or for
systems that don't have curses.
.TP
.B -s pathname
Pathname of the save file to use with the
.BR save
command.
.TP
.B -S size
Size of binbookfile for memory based books. For creating a binbookfile.
.TP
.B -t
Show statistics for HASHFILE
.TP
.B -T size
Set the transposition table size to 2^size entries.
.TP
.B -v
Show version and patchlevel.
.TP
.B -x value
Use
.BR value
as the evaluation window
.BR xwndw.
.TP
.B -X
Use xshogi display mode (the default).
.SH "COMMANDS"
.PP
In addition to legal moves, the following commands are available as responses.
.B Note:
command names are determined by the 
.I language
file and may vary with the implementation. The default language is English.
.PP
.B alg
-- allow algebraic input (not implemented)
.PP
.B Awindow
-- change Alpha window (default score + 90)
.PP
.B Bwindow
-- change Beta window (default score - 90)
.PP
.B beep
-- toggles beeping after each move (default: on).
.PP
.B bd
-- updates the current board position on the display.
.PP
.B book
-- turns off use of the opening library.
.PP
.B both
-- causes the computer to play both sides of a shogi game.
.PP
.B black
-- causes the computer to take the white pieces, if the computer is to move
first.
.PP
.B bsave
-- saves a game to disk as a book textfile.  
The program will prompt the user for a file name.
.PP
.B gamein
-- toggles game mode time control. Assumes the time specified for time control
is the time for a complete game.  Input with the level command should be the
game time and the expected number of moves in a game.
.B go
command must be given.
.PP
.B coords
-- show coordinates on the display (visual only)
.PP
.B contempt
-- allows the value of 
.I contempt
to be modified.
.PP
.B debug
--  asks for a piece as color piece, as wb or bn, and shows its calculated value on
each square.
.PP
.B debuglevel
--  sets level of debugging output if compiled with debug options.
.PP
.B depth
-- allows the user to change the search depth of the program.  The maximum
depth is 29 ply.  Normally the depth is set to 29 and the computer
terminates its search based on elapsed time rather than depth.  If depth is
set to (say) 4 ply, the program will search until all moves have been
examined to a depth of 4 ply (with extensions up to 11 additional ply for
sequences of checks and captures).  If you set a maximum time per move and
also use the depth command, the search will stop at the specified time or
the specified depth, whichever comes first.
.PP
.B easy
-- toggles easy mode (thinking on opponents time) on and off. The default
is easy mode ON.  If easy mode is disabled, the keyboard is polled for
input every so often and when input is seen the search is terminated. It
may also be terminated with a
.I sigint.
.PP
.B edit
-- allows the user to set up a board position.

.B  #
- command will clear the board.

.B  c 
- toggle piece color. 

.B  .
- command will exit setup mode.

.B  p3b
- place a pawn on 3b

.B  p3b+
- place a promoted pawn on 3b

.B  p*
- place a pawn to the captured pieces

Pieces are entered by typing a letter (p,l,n,s,g,b,r,k) for
the piece followed by the coordinate.

The usual warning about the
.I language file
applies.
.PP
.B exit
-- exits gnushogi.
.PP
.B first
-- tells the computer to move first. Computer begins searching for a move.
(same as "go").
.PP
.B force
-- allows the user to enter moves for both
sides. To get the program to play after a sequence of moves
has been entered use the 'black' or 'white' commands.
.PP
.B get
-- retrieves a game from disk.  The program will
prompt the user for a file name.
.PP
.B hash
-- use/don't use hashfile.
.PP
.B hashdepth
-- allows the user to change the minimum depth for using the hashfile and
the number of moves from the beginning of the game to use it.
.PP
.B help
-- displays a short description of the commands and the current status of options.
.PP
.B go
-- tells the computer to move first. Computer begins searching for a move.
(same as "first").
.PP
.B hint
-- causes the program to supply the user with its predicted move.
.PP
.B level
-- allows the user to set time controls such as 60 moves in 5 minutes etc.
In tournament mode, the program will vary the time it takes for each move
depending on the situation.  If easy mode is disabled (using the 'easy'
command), the program will often respond with its move immediately, saving
time on its clock for use later on.
.PP
.B list
-- writes the game moves and some statistics on search depth, nodes, and
time to the file 'shogi.lst'.
.PP
.B material
-- toggle material flag - draws on no pawns and both sides < rook
.PP
.B new
-- starts a new game.
.PP
.B p
-- evaluates the board and shows the point score for each piece. The total score for
a position is the sum of these individual piece scores.
.PP
.B post
-- causes the program to display the principal variation and the score
during the search.  A score of 100 is equivalent to a 1 pawn advantage for
the computer.
.PP
.B quit
-- exits the game.
.PP
.B random
-- causes the program to randomize its move selection slightly.
.PP
.B rcptr
-- set recapture mode.
.PP
.B remove
-- backout the last level for both sides. Equal to 2 
.I undo's.
.PP
.B reverse
-- causes the board display to be reversed.  That
is, the black pieces will now appear at the top of the board.
.PP
.B rv
-- reverse board display.
.PP
.B save
-- saves a game to disk.  The program will prompt the user for a file name.
.PP
.B switch
-- causes the program to switch places with the opponent and begin
searching.
.PP
.B test
-- performs some speed tests for MoveList and CaptureList generation, and
ScorePosition position scoring for the current board.
.PP
.B time
-- set computer's time remaining, intended for synchronizing clocks among
multiple players.
.PP
.B tsume
-- toggle tsume mode. In tsume mode, not all possible moves will be
generated. If a king is in check, only moves that get the king out of check
are generated.  If the king is not in check, only moves that give check to
the opponent's king are generated.
.PP
.B undo
-- undoes the last move whether it was the computer's
or the human's. You may also type "remove". This is equivalent
to two "undo"'s (e.g. retract one move for each side).
.PP
.B white
-- causes the computer to take the black pieces, if the computer is to move
first the
.B go 
command must be given.
.PP
.B xget
-- read an 
.I xshogi
position file.
.PP
.B xsave
-- save as an 
.I xshogi
position file.
.PP
.B xwndw
-- change X window. The window around alpha/beta used to determine whether
the position should be scored or just estimated.
.SH BUGS
.PP
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.nf
xshogi(6)
.fi

